---
layout: default
title: Summer 2021 DREU Project 
---

* TOC
{:toc}

## About Me

My name is Christian and I'm from Michigan. I am currently a rising senior Computer Science undergraduate student at Columbia University. I enjoy studying the ways that computer science methodologies can be used within other disciplines. I embarked on this research experience with little to no expectations but it allowed me to learn alot about myself and how I handle challanges. 

## About My Mentor

Professor Kevin J. Liu currently teaches at Michigan State University where he leads a Computational Biology Lab. His lab creates new computational methodologies for efficient and accurate comparative genomic analyses – especially in the context of complex evolutionary scenarios – and then connects the resulting insights to phenotype and function. The end goal of their big-data-driven approach is to generate hypotheses that result in new biological and biomedical discoveries.
website: https://www.cse.msu.edu/~kjl/academic.html

## About My Project

Throughout my research I have been working with new OS as well as phylogenetic sequencing models. Most of my research was developed ad-hoc as I struggled to familiarize myself with other Operating Systems and software that was not adaptable on 64-bit newer mac OS. I would say the bulk of my experiments thus far have related to birth-death models and testing evolutionary statistical models on them to see where species may have had common ancestors or diverged species based off of distributions like Poission. Most of the experiments have been highly theoretical and almost harder for me to interpret as I am not ver knwoledgeable in the realm of gene sequencing and evolutionary tree models but I am slowly but surely familiarizing myself with this all. 



## My Blog

Week One: Welcome to my site detailing my research with Professor Liu. During my first week of the research experience I was tasked with readings that went over phylogentics and gene sequencing techniques. Being that I do not have an extensive experience in biology, there were a lot of points of learning for me. Some of the more important models that I learned about were the Cavender-Ferris-Neyman Model which is a phylogentic estimation model often abbreviated CFN. I also read  about the many statistical distribution types used to analyze evolutionary trees. I spoke alot with one of my lab mentors about which she used most often within her research and she mentioned Maximum Parsimony which is a phylogenetic estimnation method used in practice. Much of the material relating to trees felt oddly familiar just due to my coursework in Discrette Mathematics and Data Structures thus, it was was interesting to learn more about them within the evolutionary biology world. The reading were largely out of textbooks of which my PhD mentor she breifly referenced throughout her research. I was comforted to know that all of what I was learning was not intuituive for the PhD students as well and that they often had to cross reference the very same textbooks and chapters. 

Week Two: As the reading were quite long I took this week to meet with this mentor about my progress thus far as I had not finished the roughlt three hundred pages of introductory information. She suggested I think less about the details of the textbook and think more about the bigger picture. Professor Liu had also given me the same advice. They both pushed the idea of understanding larger concepts from the textbook and using it as a starting point only. I continued to read from Inferring Phylogenies by Felsenstein who wrote about the Fitch and the Sankoff algorithms which are both methods to count evolutionary changes. Further, I read about the statistical properties of parsimony which I cannot say I truly understood. Again, my mentor and research advisor told me that it was not important to understand the intricacies of the properties and methods abut to think more about why it was important to conduct this typoe of analysis. 

Week Three: My research mentor mentioned to me that there was another student completing the DREU research experience although she was starting a bit later than myself. I definately was interested in being connected with her as well as the other undergraduate researches in the lab for the summer. Dr. Liu did the honor of emailing us all to introduce us which was amazing. I went ahead and scheduled some time to chat with the undergraduate researches within the lab as well as some individuals who were previously a part of the lab. I was very happy that Dr. Liu was able to connect us. All of the individuals I spoke to gave raving reviews about their time working under Dr. Liu which was very encouraging for me. Furthermore, the other undergaduate researches I spoke to had no idea there were other individuals working under Dr. Liu for the summer so it was fun to offer myself up as a resource. Toward the end of this week I informed my PhD mentor as well as Dr. Liu that I had finished my readings thus I was ready to ginto the more interactive portion of the summer - tutorial experiements. 

Week Four: Dr.Liu sent me a detailed list of experiments to conduct as my first research. I began this feat by attempting to download INDELible which is one of the most often used software within the lab - it generates phylogentic trees/AGTC sequences. Much to my surprise, when I tried to compile the software within terminal I ran into various errors that I had never encountered before. I did not have much experience with command line compilation but in some of my more recent classes I was tasked with using Linux commands and it felt like familiar territory for me. Further, I was unable to successfully compile the software through my Mac terminal, after attmepting for 2-3 days. I emailed both my PhD mentor and Dr. Liu to inquire about possible solutions. initially, Dr. Liu susggested that I try native C compilation through Xcode but myself nor my mentor was familiar with this method. My PhD mentor responedd by suggesting that I play with VirtualBoax - virtualization software. I had no experience with applkications like this so I was initally hesitant but I went ahead and tried the software steps/tutorial software she sent me. She warned me that this may be a long shot but this was all she could find as she was not a Mac user, neither was Dr Liu. I tried to download the virtulaization software which required that I donwload a much earlier version of Mac OS. 

Week Five: I tried to make the virtualization software work with two older versions of Mac OS both of which supported 32-bit applications. I soon figured out that the reason that the software was not working was because my newer Mac OS did not support 32-bit applications. Further, neither of the Mac OS were accessible by VritualBox after I downloaded both of them my Mac returned the error message that my stsem was too new to even open the packages. Additionally, when I downloaded the software fromt he App Store it was set up so that I only had access to the installer once the donwload was complete thus the virtulization software was unable to use that OS. I ended up meeting with Dr. Liu to discuss all of these challanges and he again suggested I try the compilation through XCode which I did end up doing. I was not super familiar with XCode compilaiton but I soon reaalized it was wildly similar to command line when using C. I only started to run into challanges when I used that the version of C used in the indelible software was much older than that supported by Xcode. 

Week Six: During this week I met alot more with my PhD mentor as well as some of the other undergraduate researches in Dr. Liu's Lab. The undergraduate students told me they were struggling tto use the other software as well. My PhD mentor suggested I use virtual environemtn software. For a few days I just sat and researched virtual environement software and ended up using my computer to download Virtualbox. This was a difficult task just because memory was at stake. I had to do a lot of clearing out to get VirtualBox to then use Ubuntu. By the end of this week I was able to succesfully use VirtualBox to begin the experiments with Indelible. 

Week Seven:  During week seven I completed the first full experiment.  Ultimately, I was able to create the non-ultrametric birth-death tree using Indeilble to begin. The program allowed me to use a designated amount of taxa as well as to set the tree depth. I then used this tree as the “model species tree” to use the ms software to perform a single simulation under the multi-species coalescent model. MS is a program for generating samples under neutral models. The program is aimed at investigating the statistical properties of samples. When using MS, I set the number of samples and replicates. I was also able to use certain flags on the command line to output the gene tree corresponding to the simulated local coalescent history as well as the time for divergence event and the specified populations. I was able to get one local gene tree as output. After getting this output I then simulated the DNA sequence evolution down the gene tree using Seq-Gen. Seq-Gen is a software program that simulates the evolution of nucleotide or amino acid sequences along a phylogeny, primarily using different models of the substitution process. I used the Jukes-Cantor model with the Seq-Gen platform. After I received the data from this iteration I had officially simulated a full synthetic dataset for the experiment. The next step in the process was to use FastTree to estimate a maximum likelihood gene tree under the Jukes-Cantor model. FastTree is a software that infers approximately-maximum-likelihood phylogenetic trees from alignments of nucleotide or protein sequences. While the estimated gene tree was not topologically identical to the true gene tree, you are able to quantify the topological differences between the two trees using the Robinson-Foulds distance. I used the symmetric difference function in the dendropy method to calculate the Robinson Foulds distance. The aforementioned series of experiments did not go as intended as the process took various weeks. The biggest challenge came with navigating the respective software while making sure the input and output were as expected. 

Week Eight: During week eight I tried one more iteration of the full experiment. Further, I met with my PhD mentor to walk through the process and expected results. It was amazing to actually use the software and understand things. Further, I met with Dr. Liu during this week to talk through the flow of my research as well as all of the hiccups I encountered. Dr. Liu was very encouraging and even offered to help support me if I did want to continue learning from within his lab. 


## Final Report
Link: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1vUIM_-5sP3Zh9dKQ9CPLb4pS2QLFjbeZ3Y9EG2o65Ps/edit?usp=sharing
